Update Zarr content in slides and tweak formatting (#160)
cloudnativegeo/cloud-optimized-geospatial-formats-guide: overview.qmd

title: Cloud-Optimized Geospatial Formats Overview
subtitle: These slides are a summarization of [Cloud-Optimized Geospatial Formats Guide](https://guide.cloudnativegeo.org/) to support presentations.
author:
  - "Authors + Credits: Aimee Barciauskas, Alex Mandel, Brianna Pagán, Vincent Sarago, Chris Holmes, Patrick Quinn, Matt Hanson, Ryan Abernathey, Max Jones"
format:
  revealjs:
    incremental: true
    theme: [default, custom.scss]
---

# Cloud-Optimized Geospatial Formats Overview

Google Slides version of this content: [Cloud-Optimized Geospatial Formats](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1F89kcrtX9LNQPTOuwyL5FRex_8--Vlg-DA8GJNzWqGk/edit?usp=sharing).

::: {.notes}
These slides were generated with https://quarto.org/docs/presentations/revealjs.
Source: https://github.com/cloudnativegeo/cloud-optimized-geospatial-formats-guide.
:::

::: {.incremental}
# What Makes Cloud-Optimized Challenging?

> * No one size fits all approach.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* There is no one size fits all approach.
```

This probably should have been a sentence to begin with...

## What Does Cloud-Optimized Mean?

* File metadata in one read

> * When accessing data over the internet, such as when data is in cloud storage, latency is high when compared with local storage so it is preferable to fetch lots of data in fewer reads. Each read should happen at the same time.

Author: Yes, I clarified based on your question in [`f3d275f` (#160)](https://github.com/cloudnativegeo/cloud-optimized-geospatial-formats-guide/pull/160/commits/f3d275f7c56a41ab04ca2465bc6a4aee55699811)

::::

::: footer
image source: https://xarray.dev/
:::

# What is Virtual Zarr?

> * Virtual Zarrs include metadata along with references to data in archival file formats, such that you can leverage the benefits of partial and parallel reads for archives in NetCDF4, HDF5, GRIB2, TIFF and FITS. Kerchunk and Icechunk provide ways to persist Virtual Zarr stores on disk or in object stores.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Virtual Zarr stores include metadata along with references to data in archival file formats, such that you can leverage the benefits of partial and parallel reads for archives in NetCDF4, HDF5, GRIB2, TIFF and FITS. Kerchunk and Icechunk provide ways to persist Virtual Zarr stores on disk or in object stores.
```

. . .

<img src="./images/virtual-zarr.png" style="margin: 0px auto; display: block; width:700px;"/>

## Zarr Specs in Development

* V2 is widely adopted. Zarr V3 was recently released.
* Zarr V3 provides additional extension mechanisms and sharding, which allows high concurrency while minimizing the number of files.

> * Zarr Python 3 implements Zarr V3 while still supporting Zarr V2, with dramatic performance improvements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Zarr Python 3 supports reading and writing to Zarr format V3 while still supporting Zarr V2, with dramatic performance improvements.
```

* Brianna Pagán (formerly NASA, currently Development Seed) has organized the OGC GeoZarr standards working group (SWG) to establish standards for geospatial metadata. The SWG includes representatives from many other orgs in the industry.

> * The GeoZarr spec defines conventions for how geospatial data should be organized in a Zarr store. The spec details how the Zarr DataArray and DataSet metadata, and subsequent organization of data, must be in order to be conformant as GeoZarr archive. The spec remains in development.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The GeoZarr spec defines conventions for organizing geospatial data in a Zarr store. Specifically, the spec defines conventions for Zarr DataArray and DataSet metadata and organization of associated data to be conformant as GeoZarr archive. The spec remains in development.
```

::: {.column width="50%"}

* Vector data is traditionally stored as rows representing points, lines, or polygons with an attribute table.
* GeoParquet defines how to store vector data in Apache Parquet, which is a columnar storage format (like many cloud data warehouses). “Give me all points with height greater than 10m”.

> * Highly compressed.

Reviewer: Ideally we make all of these bullets complete sentences if adding period punctuation...
```suggestion
* Geoparquet is highly compressed.
```

> * Single-file or multi-file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Geoparquet can be stored in a single- or multi-file store.
```

> * Recent support added to GeoPandas as a distinct function, R support with GeoArrow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Geoparquet support was recently added to GeoPandas and is supported in R with GeoArrow.
```

Who can verify the R support? I'm not entirely sure what it means it is supported with GeoArrow as that is the in-memory format. Can Geoparquet be loaded in R?

> * Potential for cross language in-memory shared access.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Geoparquet provides the potential for cross language in-memory shared access.
```

Isn't this for GeoArrow?

Perhaps @kylebarron can help clear up this question and the one above.
